# NHP_NNP Brain Template & Atlas Collection

## NHP brain template and atlas
- This folder collects all the templates and atlases designed for use with 
  the HCP pipeline, enabling accurate analysis of cortical folding, 
  parcellation, and connectivity across mammalian species. The data were 
  released as part of the international initiative, the Non-Human Primate 
  Neuroimaging & Neuroanatomy Project (NHP_NNP).
  
- All data were preprocessed with the HCP pipeline. For rhesus macaque, 
  cynomolgus macaque, and marmoset, templates were additionally dedrifted 
  (unbiased population-level nonlinear registration) and symmetrized to 
  reduce left-right shape bias. Symmetrization was done via registration 
  between the original and mirrored data (sulci in surface or T1w signal 
  in volume), and mid-point warping was applied to the originaldata. 
  Metrics of templates (sulci in surface and T1w and T2w signals in 
  volume) were not averaged across hemispheres to preserve true biological
  asymmetry and sensitivity for asymmetry analysis. The final templates were
  aligned to AC-PC space and embeded in the grid voxels in a field of view
  fully covering head and brain. 

- Dedrifting: the group average templates were corrected for this spatial bias
  (drift) for both surface and volumes, by determining the dedrifting warp 
  field and applying it to the individual's data, and averaging the re-resampled
  images.Dedrifting warp was generated by calcuating inverse of averaged warpfield.
  
- Symmetrization: To generate a left–right mirrored volume, we applied an x-axis
  reflection in world (scanner) coordinate space. A geometrically correct mirror
  image is generated by both the voxel intensities and the spatial metadata 
  (sform/qform) are consistently updated. Symmetrization of volume was performed 
  using linear and non-linear registration using FSL FLIRT and FNIRT. The 
  signals of volumes (T1w and T2w signal intensity) were not averaged between 
  symmetrized hemispheres to preserve true biological asymmetry and sensitivity
  for asymmetry analysis. To generate surface mirrored data, metric data (i.e., 
  sulci) was changed by setting the structure to the contralateral (e.g., from
  CORTEX_RIGHT to CORTEX_LEFT) using wb_command. Symmetrization of surface
  was done using surface matching registration, FSL MSM, using sulcal metrics.

- Prime factorization principle of hundredsfold x-origin: The x-origin was set to 48.0 mm 
  for the macaque template and 24.0 mm for the marmoset template. These values 
  were chosen such that their hundredfold multiples (4800 and 2400, 
  respectively) are composed solely of the prime factors 2, 3, 5 (i.e., 
  4800= 2⁶ × 3 × 5² and 2400 = 2⁵ × 3 × 5²). This property ensures that 
  template can be resampled with a symmetric voxel grid across the midline at 
  the following resolution: .01, ,02, .03, .04, .05, .06, .08, .10, .12, .15, 
  .16, .20, .24, .25, .30, .32, .40, .48, .50, .60, .64, .75, .80, .96, 1.00, 
  1.20, 1.50, 1.60, 1.92, 2.00 mm (.64 and 1.92mm apply only to the macaque 
  template). Thus, upsampling or downsampling of the templates at any of 
  these resolutions avoids resampling-induced voxel asymmetry across midline.
  Note that the same prime factorization principle underlies the x-origin of 
  the standard human MNI templates (x-origin=90mm; 9000 = 2³ × 3² × 5), which
  similarly enables symmetric voxel arrangement grids at a comparable set of 
  resolutions: .01, .02, .03, .04, .05, .06, .08, .09, .10, .12, .15, .18, .20,
  .24, .25, .30, .36, .40, .45, .50, .60, .72, .75, .90, 1.00, 1.20, 1.25,
  1.50, 1.80, 2.00mm.

- Macaque data were collected from the RIKEN Center for Biosystems Dynamics 
  Research (BDR) in Kobe, Japan, and the Stem Cell and Brain Research Institute 
  (SBRI) in Lyon, France, while marmoset data were collected from RIKEN BDR, 
  and chimpanzee data from the Yerkes National Primate Research Center (YNPRC) 
  in Atlanta, USA. Data acquisition methods and other information are described
  in the README for each species.
  
- Currently available species are chimpanzee, rhesus macaque, cynomolgus 
  macaque, and marmoset. Snow monkey and night monkey are also planned. 
  Rodents are also under consideration. Chimpanzee data is planed for applying
  symmetrization and x-origin prime factorization principle.

## References
- Van Essen, D. C., Donahue, C. J., Coalson, T. S., Kennedy, H., Hayashi, T. 
  & Glasser, M. F. Cerebral cortical folding, parcellation, and connectivity 
  in humans, nonhuman primates, and mice. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.* 
  116(35), 201902299 (2019) doi:10.1073/pnas.1902299116.
- Hayashi, T., Hou, Y., Glasser, M. F., Autio, J. A., Knoblauch, K., 
  Inoue-Murayama, M., Coalson, T., Yacoub, E., Smith, S., Kennedy, H. & 
  Van Essen, D. C. The nonhuman primate neuroimaging and neuroanatomy project. 
  *NeuroImage* 229, 117726 (2021).
  
## Please acknowledge the funding source
- Papers, book chapters, books, posters, oral presentations, and all other 
  printed and digital presentations of results derived from NHP_NNP data 
  should contain the following wording in the acknowledgments section: 

> Data were provided [in part] by the Non-Human Primate Neuroimaging and 
>  Neuroanatomy Project, WU-SBRI/LU-RIKEN/KU Consortium (Principal Investigators: 
>  David Van Essen, Matthew Glasser, Henry Kennedy, Takuya Hayashi) funded by
>  grants NIH R01 MH-060974 (to D.C.V.E. and M.F.G.), ANR LABEX CORTEX 
>  (ANR-11-LABX-0042) of Université de Lyon (ANR-11-IDEX-0007) (to H.K.), 
>  ANR-11-BSV4-501, CORE-NETS (to H.K.), ANR-14-CE13-0033, ARCHI-CORE 
>  (to H.K.), ANR-15-CE32-0016, CORNET (to H.K.), CAS No. 2018VBA0011 (to H.K.),
>  AMED JP18dm0307006, JP23wm0625001 (to T.H.) and JSPS KAKENHI JP22H04926 
>  (to T.H.).

## Please cite the publication
- Papers, book chapters, books, posters, oral presentations, and all other 
  printed and digital presentations of results derived from NHP_NNP data 
  are encouraged to cite the following publication:
> Hayashi, T., Hou, Y., Glasser, M. F., Autio, J. A., Knoblauch, K., 
>  Inoue-Murayama, M., Coalson, T., Yacoub, E., Smith, S., Kennedy, H. & 
>  Van Essen, D. C. The nonhuman primate neuroimaging and neuroanatomy project. 
>  *NeuroImage* 229, 117726 (2021).
